---
author: Roland Huß
date: '2010-03-30T18:10:49+00:00'
excerpt: Jmx4Perl reaches is next evolution step, with a bunch of new features. The
  most important news are a new JDK 6 based JVM agent which allows monitoring of arbitrary
  Java applications (not only servlet containers) and the support for bulk read requests.
slug: jmx4perl-0-65
tags:
- Jmx4Perl
title: Jmx4Perl 0.65
---

Jmx4Perl reaches is next evolution step, with a bunch of new features. The most important news are a new JDK 6 based JVM agent which allows monitoring of arbitrary Java applications (not only servlet containers) and the support for bulk read requests.

<!--more-->

# The Jmx4Perl spring update

Yeah, spring is coming and the growing energy needs some space to expand to ;-) [jmx4perl][1] goes into its next round with version [0.65][2] containing a lot of new, exciting features.

## JDK 6 JVM agent

This version includes a generic [JVM agent][3] which can be used to instrument *any* Java application for usage with jmx4perl. The only prerequisite for now is a Sun JVM 6  since the agent uses the [HttpServer][4] included in Sun's JVM implementation. This restriction will probably relaxed in a further version.

This agent has been successfully tested with [ActiveMQ][5], [Hadoop][6] and [Teracotta][7].

Now there are really no excuses to **not** use jmx4perl ;-)

The agent has to be added as a startup parameter for Java application to monitor:

<pre>
  java .... -javaagent:j4p-jvm-jdk6-0.65-agent.jar=port=7777,host=localhost ....
</pre>

It can be configured via agent options or with a property file. Details are explained in the `README`.

## Bulk read requests

If you follow the evolution of jmx4perl, you might have noticed that since 0.40 jmx4perl can use bulk requests, which combine multiple `JMX::Jmx4Perl::Requests` into a single HTTP-Request resulting in a single server turnaround. However, if you want to read multiple attributes from a single bean, or the same attribute from many, similar beans (like queue representations of a JMS provider) you would have need to setup multiple `JMX::Jmx4Perl::Request` objects which can be rather tedious, e.g. if you don't know the full MBean names in advance (you would have to do a *search* first).

Now there is a simple alternative with a single `JMX::Jmx4Perl::Request` to collect multiple attribute values at once:

```perl
$val = $jmx->get_attribute("java.lang:type=*",
                             ["HeapMemoryUsage","NonHeapMemoryUsage"]);
  print Dumper($val);

  $VAR1 = {
    'java.lang:type=Memory' => {
              'NonHeapMemoryUsage' => {
                          'committed' => '87552000',
                          'used' => '50514304',
                          'max' => '218103808',
                          'init' => '24317952'
              },
              'HeapMemoryUsage' => {
                          'committed' => '174530560',
                          'used' => '38868584',
                          'max' => '1580007424',
                          'init' => '134217728'
              }
     }
  };
```

## Multiple bug fixes and minor enhancements

The following bugs has been squeezed and small goodies has been added, too:

* Operational parameters *maxDepth*, *maxCollectionSize* and *maxObjects* work for POST requests now, too.
* Added the *ignoreErrors* operational parameter to allow ignoring failed attribute reads when using the new bulk read feature. Those attributes are simply ignored in the return value. If not given, a single failed attribute will let the whole request fail.
* Fixed quoting of strangely named MBeans. *search* now returns the MBean names which are properly escaped so that they can be used directly in further JMX operations without need of a conversion. The quoting mechanism is described [here][8] in detail.
* For `GET` HTTP requests there is now an alternative representation of the pathinfo using a query parameter *p*. The reason for this is, that certain application servers don't allow certain URL escaped characters for security reasons (like '/', '\' or ';') in an URL path. This variant will be automatically chosen by `JMX::Jmx4Perl::Agent` if it detects an unsafe character in the generated GET HTTP URL
* `JMX::Jmx4Perl::Request` and `JMX::Jmx4Perl::Agent` has been hardened in order to be more smart with unsafe MBean Names and detect automatically the most convenient HTTP Request method (if not explicitly set)
* More unit and integration tests added.
* A new *VERSION* command has been added to `JMX::Jmx4Perl` in order to get to agent and protocol version. jmx4perl's *--version* shows this server side information, too, if provided with an agent url
* Fixed error handling for bulk requests. Now each request object will return an associated response object even in the error case.
* Fixed `JMX::Jmx4Perl->info` for IBM JVMs.
* A method `JMX::Jmx4Perl->parse_name()` has been added for splitting up a given MBean object name into its parts, domain name and key-value pairs for the attributes.

## What's next ?

For version 0.70 a generic JMX shell is on the roadmap, *j4psh*, which allows for interactive access to remote JMX MBeans. It will reuse the experience gained while developing [osgish][10], my little OSGi remote shell.

Especially the following stuff hangs around in my mind for j4psh:

* Local caching of remote JMX information
* Context sensitive command line completion on MBean names, attributes and operations.
* Plugin infrastructure to provide application specific JMX operations like 'show me all queues of an ActiveMQ instance'
* Interactive generation of Nagios configuration by a dialog.
* Syntax Highlighting

What would you like to see in a JMX shell ? Let me know, it's still conception time. As always, there are neither an ETA nor promises, though ;-)

 [1]: http://www.jmx4perl.org
 [2]: http://search.cpan.org/~roland/jmx4perl-0.65
 [3]: http://java.sun.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/lang/instrument/package-summary.html
 [4]: http://java.sun.com/javase/6/docs/jre/api/net/httpserver/spec/com/sun/net/httpserver/HttpServer.html
 [5]: http://activemq.apache.org/
 [6]: http://hadoop.apache.org/
 [7]: http://www.terracotta.org/
 [8]: http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.5.0/docs/api/javax/management/ObjectName.html
 [10]: /osgish/